---
layout: "post"
title: "IM Martin Kersten"
author: "Arjen P. de Vries"
date: "2023-01-08 12:00"
excerpt: "The CIDR 2023 conference in Amsterdam started with an In Memoriam session for Martin Kersten..."
---

The CIDR 2023 conference in Amsterdam started on Jan 8th with a very
special opening session: a Memorial session to commemmorate Martin
Kersten, who passed away in summer 2022.

Peter Boncz (CWI colleague and Martin's PhD candidate who did the main
implementation work on MonetDB) and Arno Siebes (my boss when I joined
CWI as postdoc) spoke first, followed by my contribution below, after
which the session continued with EPFL's Anastasia Ailamaki, University
of Athens' Yannis Ioannidis (also the current ACM president), ETH's
Gustavo Alonso, and, finally, CMU's Andy Pavlo who closed the session
with a video that made everyone smile. 

I addressed the audience with the following speech.

## In Memoriam: Martin Kersten

Dear colleagues and friends, Martin's sons Rene & Joost, less than one
year old grand-daughter Martha, we're gathered here at CIDR, in
Amsterdam, to share our thoughts and memories. And how appropriate it
is, to have this IM here and now! 

Martin lived and worked here in Amsterdam, but was much more a part of
the world-wide, somewhat US-centric database community, than he was a
Dutch scientist. During my PhD, I've heard comments such as
"Martin with his database system", expressed in a derogative way, and,
to be fair, that feeling was a mutual one! When I as a postdoc
attempted to acquire funding from NWO, the Dutch science foundation,
Martin was not exactly motivating in his remarks to "forget about it,
they only care about past performance".

We can state without hesitation that Martin was too extraordinary to
be bounded by our scientific system. And, I will argue here, among
friends, that Martin could not care less - he had a much grander
vision for what to do with his remarkable talents. To me, Martin has
always been more of an artist than a scientist; and I believe that he
would strongly approve of this view. Who has seen the works by Monet
in real life immediately understands the grandeur that matches
Martin's art. Art, presented in the form of data management
contributions instead of paintings, but really stretching far beyond
"just" scientific work.

Really, Martin mainly cared about his own creativity and expressing
that in crazy original ideas. He was never impressed by papers that I
thought interesting, and he did need the rigour of Peter and Stefan to
sell his ideas in the scientific community. I hope that I make it
sufficiently clear that I do not say these things to disregard
Martin's contributions to the database field - these are immense! But
the key to these contributions are their originality, enabling us to
view the same world in a new way, again and again, really as an artist
creating different works in a unique and impressive style of their
own.

So how would one characterize Martin's style as a _data artist_?
I'd say that his work resembles more Mondrian than Monet, in the sense
that he opened up new perspectives using very basic principles, just
like the colours and lines in De Stijl. He'd ask questions like "what
would you type when I present you an empty database shell", or "why
would we never expire data", and then throw in excellent analogies to
help steer our thinking. He wrote about data management using
terminology including _data fungi_, _fragmented worlds_,
_a data cyclotron_, _mammals eating dinosaurs_, _database cracking_,
your friendly _butler_ Charles - and then I'm only listing a tiny
fraction of all the fantastic beasts that Martin would come up with to
express his ideas.

You can only try to imagine how incredibly inspiring it has been for
us to witness Martin's thinking process, seeing first-hand how great
ideas originate, how _data art_ comes into existence! 

I do want to be honest today, and add that being close to such a
brilliant mind is not always easy. In a discussion, or even just a
conversation, I'd say that Martin would often be "poignant". I was
lucky to find this word in a dictionary when working on this speech;
it captures perfectly what I wanted to express, meaning "painfully
affecting the feelings, piercing", but also, "pleasurably
stimulating". 

The closer you would be, the harder it could be - in that sense, my
own interests were distinct enough to never _really_ feel the heat,
but I too had to find how to best collaborate. What made Martin
special, however, was that he himself was always looking for _the best
way to cooperate_ as well. Once you're on his team, he'd create
opportunity; I do not think I would have been full professor if it
were not for his coaching, and if the science community would not be
the best path for someone dear to Martin, he'd find them a different
way to stay on board; he'd invent or identify a different role in the
institute, or found a new company; his creativity as a manager could
certainly rival the originality of his scientific work - that _data
art_.

To me, Martin personally invented the "Erkennen & Waarderen" policy
that is making the rounds in the Dutch science community today
(Recognition & Rewards, for English speakers). He realised very well
that for him to shine, he should not seek ten almost identical
players, but rather build a team with diverse competences. He would
ask you to decide for yourself what is your position, where you'd play
the best. He also had a sharp eye for talent, and would not hesitate to
help you see where you should play (or he would simply tell you).

I want to close with personal words of thanks. 

Martin, you were a tremendous source of inspiration. You made us see
our talents, and go after developing them further, making the most of
those. You were very important for my career, both inside academia and
outside, as aspiring entrepreneur. You have coached me for more than
twenty years, and I'm so grateful for this influence on my life!

Our relationship was predominantly a professional one, but I also
remember how you were very supportive when I needed a little help to
restart my life, after leaving a long relationship; and as an advisor
to Spinque, you have always encouraged us, myself and co-founders
Wouter Alink and Roberto Cornacchia, in choosing our own path in
entrepreneurship; advising us, paired with the right degree of being
critical and pushy - to ensure we would have success too, in spite of
our non-standard views on how to run a high tech software business.

Martin, you taught me to be independent and I thank you for that more
than anything else. 

Would there ever be a _Museum of Data Art_, __"The works and life of
Martin Kersten"__ would be the founding exhibition, that's a sure thing.

May you rest in peace, while living on as inspiration in us all.

Thank you for everything.
